The world economy in
crisis. Europe in shock.
Riots, mass unemployment,
extreme parties on the
march. It was not supposed
to be this way. After the
war, the European Union
was built to secure
cooperation, prosperity,
and peace in Europe. And
later, a common currency
was introduced, the Euro.
It resulted in a long
boom, but it ended in a
spectacular bust.
Where did Europe go wrong?
And is the United States right
now repeating the
same mistakes?
Hello, I'm Johan Norberg.
And this is Malmo...Sweden,
my hometown. If we had
been standing here in the
Middle Ages, we'd be
looking at 	the busy piers
of the waterfront.
It would be lined with ships
right here. In the 14th
century those ships could
carry more than 30,000
barrels of herring,
carried to different
European ports in a single
year. At that time, Malmo
was part of the Hanseatic
League, an economic union
of cities not unlike
today's European Union.
By the 16th century, Malmo
was known throughout
northern Europe as a city
of savvy business energy,
and of a commitment to
commerce.  No one better
represented the
entrepreneurial spirit of
Malmo than Jorgen Kock.
In the 16th century, he was a
very successful banker and
trader...and the mayor of
Malmo. This building was
Jorgen Kock's home, and
the center of his vast
business operations. He
even had his bank there up
on the second floor.
Now it's a restaurant and a
conference center.
This place...and this city
represents the
entrepreneurship and the
international trade that
once made Europe
prosperous. So, it makes
it an ideal place to hold
a conference on the crisis
that is now shaking the
world. Don Boudreaux, an
economist from the United
States and I have invited
some of the world's
leading young thinkers.
They're here for a couple
days discussing the
reasons for the crisis
that is now affecting
Europe; the potential for
that crisis to affect the
United States, and how it
might affect the
day-to-day lives of all of us.
The whole debt crisis
started in Greece.
Is there more involved than
financial stability?
Well, there's no connection
between the people of
Greece and the politicians.
Every rule has been broken,
every rule has been broken.
We've all seen the stories, or
read the newspaper reports.
Are the conclusions
we draw from them
universal?
Now, you gentlemen
have discussed the economic
and financial aspects of the
debt crisis. I wanted to touch
upon another subject,
namely the consequences
for freedom and democracy,
essentially those values
that the EU is supposed to
safeguard. I mean, and now
we see that with the
fiscal compact, and the
moves towards even deeper
political integration that
the powers of national
parliaments- and
ultimately citizens to
influence the EU is
diminished, and I think
that will create a
backlash that will make it
difficult to manage the
situation. Would it be
better like to have
measures take now, rather
than postponing it?
Particularly in Southern
Europe, you will lose
political support for the
measures that need to go
through. And I think what
you are going to see is
the rise of nationalist
movements, of the left and
the right. You see that in
Greece now. You see Greece
might become the norm;
first for Italy, for
Spain, for Portugal.
I mean...even in Austria,
for example. Levels of
hostility to the European
Union are now running at
close to 50 percent.
So those values of freedom
of democracy are not as old
everywhere in Europe as
we'd like to think, and
should not be taken for granted.
Also, I think
that the concept of
liberty in the European
Union has been skewed from
a focus on basic freedoms
towards a much more
expansive concept of
freedom. If you look at the
Charter of Fundamental Rights,
for instance - it does not
only protect
freedom of expression, and
these values...it also
protects consumer protection,
social security,
and all these things
and you see that
European courts are now
starting to make decisions
that could result in
austerity measures being
declared a violation of
human rights.
The whole debt crisis started in
Greece...the canary in the
coal mine... if you will.
I went there to see what
might be in store for the
rest of us.
The Greek government
falsified the
public account to make it
into the Euro. And as a
Euro member, they had
access to the European
credit card- so they could
borrow even more.
They even lied about the
budget deficits to their
own people! But at the
same time, it made it possible
for them to buy votes
by increasing wages; by
increasing public spending.
When these lies
were exposed, the
lenders didn't want to
lend more to Greece and
the politicians had to
tell the voters that,
"We are out of money." At this
point- people reacted and
protested, but not against
spending, but against
paying for it. So instead,
they've started supporting
extremist parties;
providing simple solutions
and blaming the usual
scapegoats. It's always
nice to be able to have
your cake and eat it, too-
and send the bill to
somebody else.
Diomidus Spinellis is a
computer engineer whom the
government turned to-
to reform the tax system.
I was very optimistic...
because all I could
see around me was
low-hanging fruits; things
I could see that you just
have to lift your hand and
pick them and you can make
a change. Many of those
low-hanging fruits are
still here after two and a
half years...
and this makes me sad.
Revolt in order to find
something better...from the
annual policy in Greece.
Have you lost faith in
the politicians? Yes...yes.
There's no connection
between the people of
Greece and the politicians.
We feel completely
that no one...no one
respects our wishes.
The prices are going up...
the salaries are going
down...yeah...people have
to cope ...with the situation.
When I had my
exams to get into the
university, I was thinking
that, "Wow! I'm going to
become a pharmacist, I'm
going to have a good job;
I'm going to have a
drugstore; I'm going to
have a good life." And
now...I just...I hope I
get 30 Euros in 8 hours by
becoming...by being a waitress.
And I don't know
what I will do.
It's about 20 % of the people
in...of the population
lost their job during the
last 5 years.
20 % is unemployment.
And that's why many people
leave Greece...in order to
find...to have a better future.
Do you see young,
talented people leaving
Greece? I see it every
day. People...colleagues
here from my department
have left for universities
abroad- we're more likely
to draw many high-quality
people with very good
qualifications here.
And of course, those were
easily hirable abroad.
Stergios Sifnios runs an
orphanage in Athens.
The situation right now
in Greece...it's very, very
bad because the social
services...the state
social services are not
working well.
It must have been...
gone very far...
a parent says that,
"I'm so worried about
my future; I can't keep my
child in the family."
Can you tell us about
such an example?
What motivates them?
What do they say sometimes?
You must understand that...a
parent to come to ask us help,
especially in Greece,
where the ties in the family
is...or was very strong,
it is very strong...
So you can
imagine if a parent come
to us, to ask for us help-
it means that you
really...the problem is
very deep.
I'm frustrated and most extremely
worried by the turn things
are taking, by the rise of
population; by the rise of
French parties who are
promising empty words.
Gabriel Sakellaridis is
one of the leading
economists of the new
popular leftist party: Syriza.
Right now we have
a situation that is
impossible, in my point of
view, to have all this
debt burden repaid.
But you don't object to the
bailout money going to
Greece; you object to the
conditions that you get
those loans on?
Yes. I mean for us...what we
want to say is that right now-
the money that we receive
only go in order to repay
our debt. I think Euro
zone is going to break up
under these policies,
because they are not only
implemented to Greece-
they are implemented to
other countries as well,
such as Portugal, Italy,
Spain, Ireland. And you
see the situation in this
country after some months
of the implementation of
these policies. The
situation is getting worse
and worse.
Are you worried?
I am extremely worried.
But I want to believe
that if I work hard...
things are going better.
I think that Greece shows
that when you...
ignore economic realities,
and you build a...
political project on
basically sand, there are
huge dangers to those
ideals that you want to
safeguard. And that
affects the average Greek,
whose future is being eroded.
The problem in Greece
is that Greece was
allowed to be a free rider,
so it came in on an
illegitimate basis.
But people thought that...
Then that's a political decision!
Well...it is and it isn't,
in the sense that
it's a political decision
not just made by the Greeks,
but made by everybody
else as well.
Yes, exactly, at the European level.
The word austerity is now giving
the creeps to pretty much
all of Europe, but notably
in Greece, because nobody
wants to see that their
standard of living
forcedly going down
because of the government,
because of the mistakes
that the government made.
Do you think that this
is a way out?
It is! I mean...living
beyond your means you know...
stops at some point; you can't do
it forever. Also you can't
spend other people's money
forever, and politicians
have been doing that, and
I understand that Greeks
have been living beyond
their means for a long
time, but they will have
to change that, especially
people in the public
sector. They will have to
take the responsibility
of...you know...
dealing with the situation.
People of the public sector, you said?
Yes! Yes.
Now, say you take an
average worker of this
public sector in Greece...
a teacher, for example.
How is she, or he held responsible
for what's going on in the country?
When government
runs out of money, then
it's obvious that you will
lose your job.
So I don't, ..see any reason
of these people saying,
"Oh, we have these jobs...
we need to keep them.
We haven't done
anything wrong." Now...if
If I had to pinpoint one
responsible for what's
going on, in Greece,
in Europe just in general,
it would be the financial
sector. It would be the
urge, the greed- that's
driving people to look for
more profits. That's why
so much money has been
invested in bonds...
in Greek bonds, for example,
because they were
promising a higher yield.
Everyone is self-interested.
It's not just banking sector,
it's you and I.
We have...we are self-interested;
so we act based on
self-interest.
So...banking sector is not
an exception. Second thing
related to that...no one
is too big to fail, even banks.
You know...if they
make mistakes they should
take responsibility for that.
And I think it is
government that is saying,
"Oh we have to save this
bank, or we have to save
this company, we have to
save these people
just because it's going to
have you know, domino effect
the rest of the economy.
I think that's a mistake.
Brussels is responsible
for gathering together
many different countries
of different level,
of different GDP size,
for example.
Greece just accounts for
6% of the EU's GDP.
But altogether, it's their
fault basically that this
union was founded with a
common currency which is
tying it up so closely
together. But with a
different budget, with
non-coordinated non-
harmonized budget and
fiscal policies, and that
appears to be a way out.
I mean, if the EU had a
balanced fiscal policy,
as in the taxes would be
pretty much the same level
everywhere, that would
create a homogenous labor
market, for example, in the EU.
Well, I agree that,
you know, that would be a
solution to have more
stable Europe. But I don't
think that's good for the
economies of Europe.
I think it's better to have
the position among them in
terms of the currencies
they have, in terms of
their fiscal policies, in
terms of the taxation.
So I would actually argue
that we should go back
and abolish the Euro or have
even like, you know,
various Euro areas.
But you know, you have to
remember that Europe has
not been the same every
5, 10 years. I started living
there when it was only
12 countries. I left it when
it was 15 countries...
now it's 27 in the EU.
And they had political goal,
disregarding the economics.
And that is
haunting them, and the
sooner they face the truth,
the sooner we will
be able to get out of the crisis.
So really...the only
certain thing about
this situation is its
complete uncertainty,
wouldn't you say?
Yeah. I would agree.
Hey, you mentioned political
leadership, and that's
exactly what we looked at
with the film crew in
Brussels; the fact that
they knew that they were
going to have problems
with debts, with deficits
and easy money.
So they built these rules
and institutions to deal with it,
but the problem was
that in the end, no one
cared about them.
It's a sorry tale,
it's a sorry tale.
It could have been
done so much better with
a little bit of courage a civile,
or "civil courage,"
if you like.
When the sovereign debt
crisis exploded, the
people of Europe looked to
Brussels, the home of the
political elite.
This was their opportunity
to show what they are made of.
In 2002, the EU said it had
strict rules on debts and deficits.
In 2003, they broke those rules.
But there was one thing it
would never do...bail out
a country that had
borrowed too much.
In 2010 they did.
But there was one thing
that they would never do:
They would never buy
government bonds from countries
that had borrowed too much.
Just the next week they did.
Now they say they have new
strict rules on debts and
deficits. The question is:
Will they stand by their
words this time?
This is Fritz Bolkestein.
As a former member of the
European Commission,
he has experience from the
top level of European
politics. Why does this
happen again and again?
They said that we had the
Stability Pact and then
they broke the rules and
nothing happened, they
said that they wouldn't
bail out any particular
country, but then they
bailed out Greece.
Every rule has been broken,
every rule has been broken;
every remedy that now is
proposed...infringes the
original treaty.
What was the discussion like in the
Commission when the rules
were broken?
Very little, very little, very little.
Is it fair to say that
a lot of people in
influential positions knew
that there were problems?
Yeah. Early on? Yeah.
But they didn't really have
the guts to do something about it.
That is true, I afraid that
is true...because the
situation in Greece, and
also in Italy was known-
but not acted upon.
I think the European Union
is a marvelous thing,
if only because it's kept the peace.
I was born in 1933,
so I know what I'm talking about.
And that is now the
normal situation.
It has never been the case,
now it is the case.
So I am a supporter of the
European Union, but what
we needed was a little bit more
common sense, and a
little bit more of guts.
Then I think we would not
be in the pickle that we are now in.
Isn't there a lack of
credibility right now for
the Commission?
It began with a fiscal pact
on debts and deficits,
and just one year later
several countries broke
those rules. But at least
you would never bail out
countries that broke the rules.
And in 2010 you did-
but at least you wouldn't
buy their sovereign government
bonds, but then you did.
And now we have this new
fiscal pact, and you have
new targets for Spain's
deficit and you have
already renegotiated that...
that deficit rule.
So the question is: Why should
we take your word for granted
this time?
It's very important to
differentiate very clearly, the
political decisions which
are based on statistics,
and statistics itself.
And I think that in cases
which you mentioned
statistics was published
correctly, of course with
that problem was Greek
deficit figures for 2009,
and actually our experts
helped to solve these
problems. By letting Italy
in when it was not
satisfying the criteria,
they could later not very
well refuse Greece.
That is the true reason why
Greece was let in-
not because they falsified
their statistics, which
they did of course,
but because the European
Council- which is the heads
of states and governments,
thought that they
could not refuse
Greece what they had
allowed Italy, so there
you have the curse of the
evil deed. So, it means
that statistics already
produces a good quality
basis for sound decision
making, but what we wanted
to do to go further and to
ensure that never in the
future we will have,
you know, any political
interference into
statistics- and this is what
we proposed was our regulation.
This lack of guts among
politicians...what's the
reason for this? What part
of human nature explains
this? Well, (laughter)
that's a big question.
I'm not really used to talking
about human nature.
But what I do know is that
not many people like
standing alone...
most go with the herd...
although people who stand alone
are not necessarily incorrect.
What do you think is the
underlying cause of the crisis?
I gather you think
it's something more than
just purely financial matters.
The origins of this crisis
lie, in my view,
in the development of
a kind of a win-lose capitalism.
Too few people win,
everybody else loses.
And I think this is most
obvious in the world of
ordinary people, most
people rely on wages.
Wages have been falling
relative to GDP growth
since 1968, so people
think labor has been
earning less and less.
And they've made up the
difference with debt.
I think you're partly correct,
but I'm not quite as
pessimistic as you.
In fact, in the U.S.
wages have not declined...
that's a myth. What's happened
in the last ten years is the
Federal Reserve has
increased the money supply
too much.
Government officials have tried
to increase artificially the
supply of home ownership.
I think it's these more
economic factors that
drove this bubble and then
that bubble was inevitably
destined to burst, and it did.
We agree that you
know that the culture
should be improved.
I'm in favor of less crony
capitalism, less influence
to special interest groups.
We both agree that
those matter; but I don't
think that the culture of
capitalism has become so
decrepit, and so bad that
fundamental change on that
front is required.
I think the real problem
lies with the state,
lies with the state's efforts
to prop up its cronies.
Actually, just to put it very
simply, successful capitalists
hate capitalism.
And what they do
is they conspire often
with each other. And this
is what all legal cases in
competition are about.
They're not about the
government, they're about
cartels forming,
oligopolies forming,
that essentially say to small
businesses to people who
want to break in - no you
can't, we're gonna buy you
out, we're gonna stop you,
we're gonna create
barriers to market entry.
If you were a real free
marketer I'd suggest yes
have that critique of the
state, agree with it...
but for goodness sake-
look at the history,
look at the reality.
Let's also have a critique of the
private sector. I have
looked at the reality.
I've actually researched
this in great detail.
And in the U.S. the history
is monopolies are almost
always a product of the
government and the
anti-trust laws, it's
called in the U.S., is
used mostly to suppress
competition, not to
promote competition.
Name me one private sector
monopoly that has lasted
on its own consumers- that
did not have any support
from the state.
Well, I think you can look
at what's happened in food
retail. I think you can
look at what's happened in
finance and auditing and
almost any large business
sector, what you see over
time is a conspiracy
against competition by the
dominant players in that market.
Reality of the
situation is if you want
to start a business,
if you want to become
independent, if you want
to innovate now in both my
county, United Kingdom and
United States- economic
power concentrates, they
own too much and they
won't let you in.
How can you say that?
Google just started in 1998;
it's one of the most powerful
companies in the world.
The thing didn't even
exist 15 years ago!
But that's because it's a new
technological development,
in a new market area.
But, that's... And now many
people are worried about
Google's monopoly power.
And I would... And that
exactly makes my point!
And I would...no, no, no.
I would bet them.
Google is free. Google is free!
How is anyone hurt by Google?
It's expanded our horizons,
our opportunities...as
consumers and businessmen.
Because you cannot as a
small player, as a small
business starter -
you cannot - the Internet
you know, the ideologues of
the Internet used to say
it's a great space where
the small can come and
compete together with the big,
but the reality is the opposite.
Look at how...
...But that's
because Google is efficient!
No, it's not just because
of market efficiency.
I'm a great fan of Apple.
I'm a great fan of Google.
These are all good companies
who do great things.
But what they actually also do-
is to create barriers to
market entry, is create
shut-outs, is to create
forms that are, in effect,
a form of monopoly power.
Now what I find that is
really disturbing is-
that the modern right
can't see this...it's
blind to this. It's says,
oh it's just a successful company,
and there's no problem
with a successful company.
But nobody has
thought this in economic
thought for hundreds of
years until Milton Friedman
per versed at the
teachings of Hayek.
And I think what Friedman did,
if I may go on, which I
think is so worrying, is
he said we are going to
have competition law based
just on consumer welfare.
And consumer welfare,
which kind of sounds weird,
what does that mean?
It means low prices.
The only model that we
need is low prices,
because if we have low
prices as the model for
competition, monopolies
can't deliver you low
prices and they will break.
I disagree with you.
I think Friedman was right.
If you look at the history
when government
has stayed out, yes
you have the large firms.
It's very difficult for
inefficient firms to
compete with their larger
rivals- but consumers
benefit. The history of
capitalism in America and
in Europe tells me that
competition is very dynamic.
The only way it can
be suppressed for any
length of time is when it
gets government
privileges. I think I fear
this is ideology speaking,
not truth.
If you look at... I think
it's facts speaking.
I recently went to Greece and
I've never seen that depth of
fear for the future and
hopelessness among people,
combined with a rejection
of the old political
class...the sense of
that they've been betrayed by
politicians who promised
them everything, and now
we see the results of that.
And my fear is that
this is just the beginning-
that this might happen
to other European
countries as well.
I'm coming from France Paris,
and I observe some similar
symptoms. I mean, public
finances, the way of
conducting public policy.
And French are very afraid
of what happens with Greece.
My question when I look
at France and other countries
is that: we always
seem to get new politicians
to say that,
"Look we have an easier
way of fixing the problems.
We can somehow
find the money, or the
kind of ways of raising
new loans that will make
the transition easier."
You are exactly right.
I think French always
consider that they have
been betrayed since maybe
fifteen years about.
They don't believe in politicians
anymore...really, really...really.
This question of betrayal is
very important, because
we had such an increase of
extreme party in France
like in Europe, but in France
we had the National French
gaining 20% in the election.
This is the first time
it's so high
and this is I think the
very, very, the first
symptom of this crisis.
We have France- which is not
believing in Europe anymore,
in globalization.
They want to protect again,
and go back to
France and protect
itself...and Europe is
seen as danger.
Before it was Asia,
it was China...and now it's
Europe, it's Europe.
And this is such a horrible
irony, because the whole
European project was
supposed to build international
understanding and an end
to nationalist sentiment
and so on. It is a bit
paradoxical and sad
because people, French
people, were very proud
belonging to Europe, and
now it seems that they are
rejecting Europe because
of economy position.
And people are afraid to see
that everything is decided
in Brussels for economic items.
We have elected a
French president, of course,
but it seems that
Brussels decides for everything.
And the French people
don't want that.
And they vote against...
if we had a referendum
in France, I'm sure people
rejected Europe.
The greatest risk is that
there is no trust anymore
in any kind of political
institution. And when that
happens at the same time
that we see mass
unemployment, people -
they don't get a job.
It might even be that they
lose savings if we have
bank collapses or
hyperinflation. Then we've
seen that historically;
that's how a society
completely breaks down.
I'd like to know what
happens exactly now in the
United States?
I think that America might be
in worse shape than it looks.
Partly because they
have not really dealt with
the last financial crisis
and the banks were
heavily loaded with
unsustainable debts.
They didn't disappear; they
were just in a way sort of
transferred to... to the
government. If you look at
the average rate of debt,
it's even worse in America
than it is in the Euro system.
It's just that we
have a couple of outliers
like Greece, like Italy
and so on. But
America's future is completely
dependent on getting more
growth and get down that
debt to sustainable
levels. If they don't,
they might be the next Greece.
If California were
a separate country,
it would have the world's
9th largest economy.
It's the home of Apple,
Silicon Valley, a lot of
agriculture, wine,
Hollywood, and yet it has
the lowest bond rating of
any of the 50 states in
America. The people in
that building here in
Sacramento cannot balance
the government's budget.
Why is that?
The problem is caused by
the politicians making the
promises, but then not
funding those promises
This is David Crane.
Although a life-long
democrat, he served as
a special advisor to
Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger.
Now he's heading Govern For
California, an initiative
to get a few good people
elected to the state
legislature.  I found
that even though I had
spent all of my life
interested in politics
and I had backed candidates
and I considered myself
knowledgeable about
political issues, that I
knew nothing about what
really took place
politically in California.
The best example I can
come up with is in 1999,
when it was a dot com boom
in the United States and
stock markets were doing
really well, and the
California State Legislature
voted overwhelmingly
including Republicans.
Overwhelmingly, to grant a
retro-active pension
increase to government
employees that amounted to
probably two, the issuance
of two hundred billion
dollars' worth of debt.
And the math that they
were employing at that time
indicated that the
stock market that they
anticipated would grow ten
times faster in the 21st
century than it grew in
the 20th century.
And I think very few of
the politicians actually
understood the math.
So I think a lot of it is
financial illiteracy, and
that can only be solved by
electing better people to
the state legislature.
This is Stockton,
California located about
2 hours by car from
San Francisco.
Good Evening. Welcome to
a special Stockton City
Council meeting...
10 years ago it was
booming...filling with
Americans and immigrants
alike, dreaming of greater
prosperity. Now those
dreams have died...
only the buildings are left.
This bankruptcy will ruin
our property taxes, which
will ruin our schools
which ruins our future.
...and as our financial
people said in the meeting
we just came out of,
it looks like we're going
to be in difficult
circumstances for 10 years.
10 years, and so that
seems an endless
amount of time to a mayor
who hopefully will be here
another 4 years...but
10 years to deal with these
kinds of decisions and
budget cuts and restructuring
is really a mountain
that we have to climb.
What's the root
cause of these fiscal
challenges to Stockton?
We've had some very poor
decisions made in the
past. There is some
agreements made with
employee groups that we
can't afford any longer.
And there was also a debt
that we got into for
facilities that were built
in Stockton and we
can no longer afford.
We have millions of dollars
in debt that we have to
pay off that we simply
don't have the revenues for.
The problems that cities
like Stockton, California
are facing or San Jose,
California; the State of
California are all
problems that were
foreseeable many years ago.
The leaders at that time
spent a lot of money.
They, they bonded a
number of infrastructure
projects that they -
because they felt that the
money would continue
to come in.
I think the key is
to find a few good people.
You know, the bad news
is that you have a
state legislature, which
is governed by people or
run by people that are not
financially that literate
and have these
short-term horizons.
But the good news is:
is that it doesn't take a change
of very many of those
legislators to transform
California governance.
At our organization,
Govern for California,
we require the following
of the people that we were
interested in supporting:
One: High levels of basic
intelligence - which is
lacking- seriously lacking
among state legislators
Two: Financial literacy -
which is lacking more than
anything else among state
legislators. Three:
Diligence - I know state
legislators who don't even
read their own bills, the
bills that they themselves
introduced, they don't
read their own bills.
Four: Electability -
People that will be liked
by their fellow citizens
so they have a chance of
getting elected And Five:
And the most important is
Courage - and we define
courage as the willingness
to stand for something
greater than themselves.
California famously is
a trendsetter; where
Californians go...much of
the world seeks to follow.
But where California is
going now is not so
appealing: unsustainable
government debt and
looming municipal
bankruptcies.
Is California moving toward
a dangerous edge?
Is the rest of the U.S.
and the world following it?
From what I can tell,
my generation is the
un-greatest generation
perhaps that's ever lived
in the United States.
We cut our taxes, we issue
debt, we make promises
that we don't fund and we
leave it all for the next
generation to handle.
Tanja, you've been living
in the United States for,
for quite a while, right?
Yes, 7 years.
7 years? I mean- you can
judge, do you think the
U.S. is heading in the
same direction as the EU?
I think so.
Unfortunately, it is...
especially with the
government spending that
is going out of proportions.
It's not just, you know,
the current president,
also the previous president,
even though he was calling for
economic freedom and
saying that he will do
anything in order to make
the country freer,
he did just the opposite.
So, yes...America is on the
path to collapse as well,
on many levels.
I think a lot of Americans
are not in synched with
the reality, but if you look
at our past, there have
been countries that
prospered, and then they
collapsed because of their
mistakes. I think no one
is untouchable, and
America is behaving like
it's untouchable.
So I think America is
losing the grip, and actually
the competitiveness in
the world. Let's take
California for example,
what's going on over there?
A very bankrupt economy.
Exactly! It's suffering
a huge budget deficit
and you have cities
filing for bankruptcy.
Businesses are moving
out of California
to the nearby states.
And the other states
are taking advantage of that,
which is... I mean a normal
process.  I think what
we are forgetting here
right now and what the
world has been forgetting
the past decade or so is
that there are always good
times, and there's alway
bad times because of
business cycles or
economic cycles.
That's why so many people
were misled into thinking
that the market will only
continue growing.
That's why so much money
was pumped into the Greek
economy. That's why so
many people did not see
this crisis coming in
the first place.
I think it's known as we all know...
on a globalized world like as
the subprime mortgage
crisis that started in the
United States and moved
into Europe. I think that
in all likely chances that
the current Euro crisis
may spread out- not to all,
into the Atlantic but also
into the developing
countries...in my view,
it's like a real prospect.
But what I think the
real crisis for the U.S.
is- is that the level of
economic shock to the world.
If Europe goes down,
we'll push the U.S.
recovery back down even in
to double-dipping back
into recession.
And what that means is then
it's very difficult then for
the U.S. to recover,
because we have jobless
recoveries. And if the
U.S. can't start people
again into jobs...it won't
solve its debt crisis;
it won't start being
productive again.
Phillip, I want to get to
the point where I think that
we agreed that the crisis
we are facing- it's also
primarily a productive crisis.
From that point-
and I think that's not
part of the solution,
for this crisis- should also
be solving the
productivity crisis.
What we saw happening
was exactly the opposite.
The fact that most of the
solutions...the portrayed
solution was more on the
consumer side of the balance.
So like...we add the problem
like the sub-prime mortgages,
and there were needs.
And we tried to solve
those needs by artificially
responding to the demands-
rather than answering
the main causes.
I think that's completely
right...and I think that's
what's happened is the
short-tem electoral cycle
that we have prevents
long-term solutions.
It seems like there's
quite a bit of corruption
involved. It's all about
what they personally want.
I think my generation is
pretty angry about the
amount of debt that we're
going to be shouldering.
They're trying to make
sure that they're making
the popular choices, rather
than necessarily making
the hard correct choice.
...a culture of borrowing.
There's been a lot of
focus on the European
debt crisis where countries
like Greece are on the
brink of bankruptcy.
But what about the
United States- home of
the dollar, the world's
reserve currency?
I'm in Washington, D.C.
to find out.
Today, the U. S. Government
is spending over
a $1.40 for every $1
that it takes in in revenue.
Today, the federal government
has accumulated liabilities
and unfunded obligations
of over $550,000
per household...
and growing rapidly.
This is David Walker.
As long-time head of the
U. S. General Accounting Office,
few people know U.S. Government
finances better than he does.
For the past few years,
he's been on a fiscal tour
all across America
talking about the
financial state of the union.
The United States
is not Greece but then again,
Greece is the
cradle of democracy;
it was once the greatest
civilization on earth.
It once controlled most of
the known world,
and Greece is now a mere
shadow of itself-
because it strayed from
the principles and values
that made it great.
And Greece has got somebody
to bail it out - the United States
does not.
Financial literacy is a
particular problem in the
United States- and it's even a
bigger problem in the
congress of the United States.
There's no way
that an American family
or an American corporation
could run its finances
like the U.S. government.
Too many of our elected
officials, no matter how
well- intended, are career
politicians; they're human
beings. They don't want to
lose their job.
A lot of them think that the
people can't handle the truth,
and so they don't tell
them the truth. A lot of
them don't have answers to
these problems or, if they
do have answers, they
involve tough choices.
Public pressure is
critical because
ultimately a vast majority
of current elected
officials are career
politicians, and they want
to keep their job.
And if the public pressures them
to act and holds them
accountable for failing to act,
then they will ultimately
change...because many of
their top priorities is to
keep their job.
There are a number of
common denominators between
countries, and some of the
challenges that exist at
the federal, state and
local level here in the
United States.
In many cases, governments
have grown too big,
promised too much, and
waited too long to restructure.
I think we just don't know
how to use money.
I know that people my age
never expect to get
Social Security benefits.
Hopeful, but I wouldn't
say very optimistic.
A lot of people claim that
the problem is still the slack
capacity, unused workers.
Why not just increase
demand, employ all those
workers; put those
factories back to work ...
Well, it's important to
look at the cases that
actually have been working.
For example, take Sweden.
We have decreased taxes,
we have deregulated,
and we have cut down
on government spending
and in 2011
we made a budget surplus
of 10 billion dollars.
A single data point, right?
Look at these other countries:
Greece, Spain, Italy
- they're all depressed.
The problem is slack capacity...
excess capacity....too many
workers unemployed.
Let's put 'em back to work.
How do you get workers back
into the employment ranks?
You gotta increase demand
for what they do.
The only way to increase
demand for what they do is for
government to spend more,
because the private sector
isn't doing it.
Well, this is the things that
Keynesians always say:
Just pump more money into
the economy. But it's
important for us to look
at all those times we have
implemented these kinds of
theories and the results
have always been devastating.
Japan in the 90s,
the U.S. in '01 and '08.
What we do need is
free man, free markets
and productivity.
We as persons are good,
we can create things.
But we can't do it when
we are...buried under a burden
of government regulations.
Look, all that's fine.
But when we have
massive unemployment,
massive excess capacity,
none of that's going to
work unless demand is
increased- and government's
the only agency
that can get demand
throughout the entire
economy. Well, is there
any limit on exactly how
much debt we will put on
our children and our
grandchildren before we
realize that this way of
thought is not working?
Is there any hope the
situation, we will not, we
will all be Greece in
15, 10, 5 years?
During the last two months,
I have met more immigrants
from Ireland, Greece, Spain,
in Stockholm, in Sweden...
than I have during my
entire life before.
Is this witness of a
well-functioning idea, of
a good solution to a very
big problem? Maybe Ireland
is not spending enough
money. Maybe they...
the money supply...should
increase in Ireland.
Maybe fiscal deficits in Ireland
should rise. Let me ask
you about a more specific
problem though.
So you know, we have
these problems with banks here,
and in the U. S.
Surely, the only way we can
save the banks, are,
is through, more...
government support
for the banks.
Well, once again,
we can look to
a very recent example.
The European Central Bank
has issued one trillion Euros,
in the liquidity means
to the European banks.
And what happened was that
Spanish bonds went down
for about one month,
and then it went right up
again because this is not
a sustainable way of
solv...solving the
solvency issue in Europe.
Isn't the problem though
austerity? Austerity is
sweeping across Europe,
and austerity is what's
keeping the economies from
growing, it's what's
keeping the banks in trouble.
We just have to
open the spigots, all this
austerity stuff, this is
old-fashioned economics.
We've learned, since
Keynes, that we need
new stuff, spending.
Well...there's been a lot
of talking about austerity
in Europe, in Spain and
other countries, but if we
really look, what kind of
measures have been
implemented? I haven't
seen much austerity, not really.
America's still in
pretty bad straights;
the unemployment rate
remains stubbornly high.
Shouldn't we spend more in America?
Isn't the Keynesian remedy
appropriate for the
United States at least?
Well, however we twist and turn
this...we has to reach the
conclusion that this is
a crisis of productivity.
It's a crisis of
living over our means.
If the United States wants to
go down the European path,
I would suggest...stimulants,
and I would suggest the
Keynesian way of doing it.
But if you actually want
to have a brighter future
for your children,
I suggest some more saving
and some more working.
Seems we're in a dilemma
here....that austerity,
at least to me,
seems inevitable in most parts
of Europe. On the other hand,
you have people in
the streets, also in many
countries protesting
against this, and it's
also understandable.
How do we solve that?
It's a huge democratic problem,
I think. Tocqueville
supposedly said that
democracy can only exist
until the voters discover
that they can vote for
themselves, not just from
the public treasury.
And I think we see that
that has created the addiction
to public benefits...entitlements
that we see in Europe.
So now in Denmark,
we have the tax authorities
who are able to access your
phone records... Really?
...without a court
warrant, without
reasonable suspicion.
If you are a pensioner,
you have to report it to
your municipality.
If you leave your country
for long periods...most
municipalities have websites,
hotlines, where you can
call your, you know,
and report your neighbor
if you suspect them
of receiving entitlements
that they don't have the right to.
It seems like the
financial big brother is
watching all over you.
Yes, and you know, there's
no uproar, there's no
revolt about this because
the system that we have
created...creates this
perverse incentive for
the citizens to care about
what their neighbors are doing.
Not out of compassion-
but out of, you know,
self-interest
that you don't want someone
else to abuse the system.
So in many ways we
have created this
Byzantine Kafkaesque...
system of
laws and regulations
that in some ways
subject the average Danish citizens
to measures that we know,
that we knew in the old
Eastern Germany.
Hopefully one day we will be
out of this crisis situation.
Brussels will need to
think very hard as to how
to prevent these crises
from happening over and
over again. And to me,
as an economist, it seems
that the only way out is
to have, actually further
integration in Europe,
is to have a unified fiscal
and budget policy- because
the imbalances between
these countries are so big.
The European Union,
the Commission, its
institutions, do not have
legitimacy in the European
populations, and also,
you know, if you live in Ohio
and Pennsylvania you feel
American, but if you live
in Greece and Denmark-
you don't feel...you don't
have that same bond.
I think that it was a
mistake to build a massive
political union upon
basically the internal market.
The internal market has
worked wonderfully in creating
wealth, and democracy...
securing that in a continent
with a very bloody history.
But we simply
do not have that
shared history and culture
that is necessary for a
centralized political
union, and therefore
I think it's a huge mistake,
and it undermines the very
purpose of the EU.
So you're suggesting not a
step forward in
integration, but maybe
even a step backwards
towards sustaining the
four freedoms between
these nations?
Yes. I would...I would advocate
a more simple model that was
based largely on the four
freedoms- and not for the
political integration, and not
necessarily a common currency.
What we're seeing
with Europe and the
U.S. is trillions of
currency units created,
and yet growth is stalling.
So basically,
instead of getting back to
growth by production and
reform and competitiveness-
we're just printing new money,
creating money out of thin air.
And that creates
these bubbles, because
money ends up somewhere.
It creates the financial
bubbles which become very
destructive and destabilizing.
But all these
other things that
we're talking about in
terms of overspending,
over-indebtedness...
So what do you think happens
then, when we're in a
crisis and we're trying to
solve it by inflating the
bubbles again, just
creating new...more money?
Ultimately, it just makes
matters worse.
It's understandable that it
happens-but it's a kind of
desperation. It would be
something like giving
steroids to an arthritic
patient. It's a miracle
drug to begin with-but if
it's over-used, it becomes
worse than the problem.
But it's incredibly scary,
because if we build
the recovery...not with
reform and competitiveness
and real production,
but just in printing
more money, we create
even more unsustainable bubbles.
Where would that end in
the future...in the long run?
Absolutely...well,
the worst part is likely
to come in terms of the
social instability.
What we're seeing for
the public in the U.S.-
it will be a difficult time
for a long time.
I know that people my age
never expect to get Social
Security benefits.
This bankruptcy will ruin
our property taxes, which will
ruin our schools-
which ruins our future.
It's about 20 percent of the
people...of the population
lost their job during the
last five years.
It could have been done so
much better with a little bit
of courage a civile,
of civil courage...if you like.
When I had my exams
to get into the
university, I was thinking
that, "Wow! I'm going to
become a pharmacist,
I'm going to have a good job;
I'm going to have a drugstore;
I'm going to have a good life."
And now...I just...I hope I
get 30 Euros in 8 hours by
becoming...by being a waitress.
And I don't know
what I will do
...if we had referendum in France,
I'm sure people rejected
Europe. ...just to put it
very simply, successful
capitalists hate
capitalism. The word
austerity is now giving
the creeps to pretty much
all of Europe... But if
you actually want to have
a brighter future for your
children, I suggest some
more saving and some more
working. A lot of
people are scared about the
future...especially young people.
But you know...unfortunately,
politicians don't get the story.
They don't want to
realize the severity of
the problem; they don't
want to do anything.
They don't have the courage.
Europe is today one of the
richest continents in the world.
And my hope...my
dream is that Africa, and
indeed my country,
Mozambique, one day will
become also wealthy.
And we need to understand
the deep causes of today's
crisis, so that Africa and
Mozambique can avoid the
same mistakes that Europe
is making today.
In a way, it's not all gloomy.
We've had 10 bad years of
crisis, but at the same
time we've probably
created something like a
quarter of all the wealth
that mankind has ever
created over those 10 years.
Absolutely...and we
have to be careful not to
destroy that, because the
market is the only source
of widespread prosperity.
You know...we're not
talking about numbers when
we're talking about this.
It's really about people-
it's about their dreams.
It all comes down to that
young woman I met in Greece.
She wanted to own
a drugstore, and now she's
content just being a waitress.
And our way of dealing
with this crisis will
decide the fate of her
and millions like her.